README.md, before:

# MetStatPsyCli

Mesures, méthodes et statistiques pour psychologues cliniciens (Option Master Empirique &amp; TCC - 18h)

## Références et liens utiles

Ce document à été préparé à l'aide de différentes ressources (tutoriels en ligne, vidéos, cours, articles, ouvrages), merci à toutes celles et ceux qui partagent leurs ressources

### Tutoriels

- Tutorial EFA CFA

https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/parameters/vignettes/efa_cfa.html

- And with nice tables

https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/semTable/vignettes/semtable.pdf

https://shiny.rit.albany.edu/stat/cfa1test/lavaan.html#obtain-coefficients

https://rpubs.com/mkearney/103040

Of course lavaan Tutorials : 

https://lavaan.ugent.be/tutorial/index.html

Confirmatory Factor Analysis with R
A Draft document using lavaan, sem, and OpenMx
by Bruce Dudek

https://shiny.rit.albany.edu/stat/cfa1test/index.html

Alexander Beaujean's book: 
Latent Variable Modeling using R: A Step-By-Step Guide 
(Published by Routledge/Taylor & Francis)

https://blogs.baylor.edu/rlatentvariable/sample-page/r-syntax/

Cannot recommend enough Sacha Epskamps's tutoriels & vidéo

http://sachaepskamp.com/SEM2020

https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLliBbGBc5nn3m8bXQ4CmOep3UmQ_5tVlC

Also take a look at Caspar van Lissa

https://cjvanlissa.github.io/tidySEM/

- Measurement Invariance

Lavaan tutorial

https://lavaan.ugent.be/tutorial/groups.html

But also

https://towardsdatascience.com/testing-for-measurement-invariance-in-r-b44cace10148

https://github.com/simsem/semTools/wiki/Partial-Measurement-Invariance

https://github.com/SachaEpskamp/SEM-code-examples/blob/master/Measurement_invariance_examples/lavaan/StarWars_lavaan.R
(Again sacha Epskamp)

- Bifactor

https://blogs.baylor.edu/rlatentvariable/sample-page/r-syntax/#Bi-factor_model

http://drjosephhammer.com/research/bifactor-analysis-resources/

https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/BifactorIndicesCalculator/index.html

http://sachaepskamp.com/SEM2020#Week_4_8211_Advanced_CFA_topics
(Again sacha Epskamp)

### Ouvrages et Articles

- Ouvrages

Gana, K., & Broc, G. (2018). Introduction à la modélisation par équations structurales : Manuel pratique avec lavaan. ISTE editions.

Beaujean, A. A. (2014). Latent variable modeling using R : A step by step guide. Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.

Brown, T. A. (2015). Confirmatory factor analysis for applied research (Second edition). The Guilford Press.

Kline, R. B. (2016). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling (Fourth edition). The Guilford Press.


- Articles

Kyriazos, T. A. (2018). Applied Psychometrics : The 3-Faced Construct Validation Method, a Routine for Evaluating a Factor Structure. Psychology, 09(08), 2044‑2072. https://doi.org/10.4236/psych.2018.98117

Dima, A. L. (2018). Scale validation in applied health research : Tutorial for a 6-step R-based psychometrics protocol. Health Psychology and Behavioral Medicine, 6(1), 136‑161. https://doi.org/10.1080/21642850.2018.1472602

Schmitt, T. a. (2011). Current Methodological Considerations in Exploratory and Confirmatory Factor Analysis. Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 29(4), 304‑321. https://doi.org/10.1177/0734282911406653

Sellbom, M., & Tellegen, A. (2019). Factor analysis in psychological assessment research : Common pitfalls and recommendations. Psychological Assessment, 31(12), 1428‑1441. https://doi.org/10.1037/pas0000623

McNeish, D., & Wolf, M. G. (2020). Thinking twice about sum scores. Behavior Research Methods. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-020-01398-0

Putnick, D. L., & Bornstein, M. H. (2016). Measurement invariance conventions and reporting : The state of the art and future directions for psychological research. Developmental Review, 41, 71‑90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2016.06.004


### Podcast

https://quantitudepod.org/s3e15-heywood-cases/

https://quantitudepod.org/episode-12-measurement-noninvariance-can-we-ever-fail-to-not-incorrectly-reject-it/

https://quantitudepod.org/latent-means/

### Rmarkdown 

Pour avoir accès au fichier du cours : 
https://github.com/yannickmorvan/MetStatPsyCli/blob/main/MetStatPsyCli.Rmd

Commit message:

Add pres form D. Condon at ARP2023 (2)

README.md, after:

# MetStatPsyCli

Mesures, méthodes et statistiques pour psychologues cliniciens (Option Master Empirique &amp; TCC - 18h)

## Références et liens utiles

Ce document à été préparé à l'aide de différentes ressources (tutoriels en ligne, vidéos, cours, articles, ouvrages), merci à toutes celles et ceux qui partagent leurs ressources

### Tutoriels

- Tutorial EFA CFA

https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/parameters/vignettes/efa_cfa.html

- And with nice tables

https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/semTable/vignettes/semtable.pdf

https://shiny.rit.albany.edu/stat/cfa1test/lavaan.html#obtain-coefficients

https://rpubs.com/mkearney/103040

Of course lavaan Tutorials : 

https://lavaan.ugent.be/tutorial/index.html

Confirmatory Factor Analysis with R
A Draft document using lavaan, sem, and OpenMx
by Bruce Dudek

https://shiny.rit.albany.edu/stat/cfa1test/index.html

Alexander Beaujean's book: 
Latent Variable Modeling using R: A Step-By-Step Guide 
(Published by Routledge/Taylor & Francis)

https://blogs.baylor.edu/rlatentvariable/sample-page/r-syntax/

Cannot recommend enough Sacha Epskamps's tutoriels & vidéo

http://sachaepskamp.com/SEM2020

https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLliBbGBc5nn3m8bXQ4CmOep3UmQ_5tVlC

Also take a look at Caspar van Lissa

https://cjvanlissa.github.io/tidySEM/

- Measurement Invariance

Lavaan tutorial

https://lavaan.ugent.be/tutorial/groups.html

But also

https://towardsdatascience.com/testing-for-measurement-invariance-in-r-b44cace10148

https://github.com/simsem/semTools/wiki/Partial-Measurement-Invariance

https://github.com/SachaEpskamp/SEM-code-examples/blob/master/Measurement_invariance_examples/lavaan/StarWars_lavaan.R
(Again sacha Epskamp)

- Bifactor

https://blogs.baylor.edu/rlatentvariable/sample-page/r-syntax/#Bi-factor_model

http://drjosephhammer.com/research/bifactor-analysis-resources/

https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/BifactorIndicesCalculator/index.html

http://sachaepskamp.com/SEM2020#Week_4_8211_Advanced_CFA_topics
(Again sacha Epskamp)

### Ouvrages et Articles

- Ouvrages

Gana, K., & Broc, G. (2018). Introduction à la modélisation par équations structurales : Manuel pratique avec lavaan. ISTE editions.

Beaujean, A. A. (2014). Latent variable modeling using R : A step by step guide. Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.

Brown, T. A. (2015). Confirmatory factor analysis for applied research (Second edition). The Guilford Press.

Kline, R. B. (2016). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling (Fourth edition). The Guilford Press.


- Articles

Kyriazos, T. A. (2018). Applied Psychometrics : The 3-Faced Construct Validation Method, a Routine for Evaluating a Factor Structure. Psychology, 09(08), 2044‑2072. https://doi.org/10.4236/psych.2018.98117

Dima, A. L. (2018). Scale validation in applied health research : Tutorial for a 6-step R-based psychometrics protocol. Health Psychology and Behavioral Medicine, 6(1), 136‑161. https://doi.org/10.1080/21642850.2018.1472602

Schmitt, T. a. (2011). Current Methodological Considerations in Exploratory and Confirmatory Factor Analysis. Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 29(4), 304‑321. https://doi.org/10.1177/0734282911406653

Sellbom, M., & Tellegen, A. (2019). Factor analysis in psychological assessment research : Common pitfalls and recommendations. Psychological Assessment, 31(12), 1428‑1441. https://doi.org/10.1037/pas0000623

McNeish, D., & Wolf, M. G. (2020). Thinking twice about sum scores. Behavior Research Methods. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-020-01398-0

Putnick, D. L., & Bornstein, M. H. (2016). Measurement invariance conventions and reporting : The state of the art and future directions for psychological research. Developmental Review, 41, 71‑90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2016.06.004


### Podcast

https://quantitudepod.org/s3e15-heywood-cases/

https://quantitudepod.org/episode-12-measurement-noninvariance-can-we-ever-fail-to-not-incorrectly-reject-it/

https://quantitudepod.org/latent-means/

### To think about the Big Five as a construct
see the presentation David Condon gave at the 2023 Congress of the Association for Research in Personality :
https://twitter.com/JessieSunPsych/status/1682794801643634689?s=20
Slide available here : https://osf.io/uy4s2?view_only=a683621d9dec4caf9a257462699f81f9

### Rmarkdown 

Pour avoir accès au fichier du cours : 
https://github.com/yannickmorvan/MetStatPsyCli/blob/main/MetStatPsyCli.Rmd
